---
title: "Integrating multi-omics data with EHR for precision medicine using advanced artificial intelligence"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2023-10-12-rbme
excerpt: 'This paper is a review paper on multi-modal biomedical data integration for precision medicine.'
date: 2023-10-12
venue: 'IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering'
#slidesurl: 'https://tongli1210.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://tongli1210.github.io/files/tong2023integrating.pdf'
#bibtexurl: 'https://tongli1210.github.io/files/tong2023integrating.bib'
citation: 'Tong L, Shi W, Isgut M, Zhong Y, Lais P, Gloster L, Sun J, Swain A, Giuste FO, and Wang MD. &quot; Integrating multi-omics data with EHR for precision medicine using advanced artificial intelligence. &quot; <i>IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering</i>. 2023 Oct 12;17:80-97.'
---

With the recent advancement of novel biomedical technologies such as high-throughput sequencing and wearable devices, multi-modal biomedical data ranging from multi-omics molecular data to real-time continuous bio-signals are generated at an unprecedented speed and scale every day. For the first time, these multi-modal biomedical data are able to make precision medicine close to a reality. However, due to data volume and the complexity, making good use of these multi-modal biomedical data requires major effort. Researchers and clinicians are actively developing artificial intelligence (AI) approaches for data-driven knowledge discovery and causal inference using a variety of biomedical data modalities. These AI-based approaches have demonstrated promising results in various biomedical and healthcare applications. In this review paper, we summarize the state-of-the-art AI models for integrating multi-omics data and electronic health records (EHRs) for precision medicine. We discuss the challenges and opportunities in integrating multi-omics data with EHRs and future directions. We hope this review can inspire future research and developing in integrating multi-omics data with EHRs for precision medicine.